[Guideline] Add safe division guideline to avoid dividing by zero (#136)
rustfoundation/safety-critical-rust-coding-guidelines: src/coding-guidelines/expressions.rst

      with checked arithmetic functions.

   .. non_compliant_example::
      :id: non_compl_ex_0XeioBrgfh5z
      :status: draft

      When the division is performed, the right operand is evaluated to zero and the program panics.
      When the addition is performed, either silent overflow happens or a panic depending on the build
      configuration.

      .. code-block:: rust

         let x = 0;
         let x = 5 / x;
         let y = 135u8
         let y = 200u8 + y;

   .. compliant_example::
      :id: compl_ex_k1CD6xoZxhXb
      :status: draft

      The developer must explicitly indicate the intended behavior when a division by zero or arithmetic
      overflow occurs when using checked arithmetic methods.

      .. code-block:: rust

         let x = 0;
         let result = match 5u32.checked_div(x) {
            None => 0
            Some(r) => r
         }
         let y = 135u8
         let y = 200u8.wrapping_add(y);

.. guideline:: Do not use unchecked integer arithmetic methods
   :id: gui_mNEvznFjC3kG
   :category: advisory
   :status: draft
   :release: latest
   :fls: fls_Q9dhNiICGIfr
   :decidability: decidable
   :scope: module
   :tags: numerics

>    This guideline applies to any call to the integer type methods that begin with `unchecked_`.

Reviewer: Two things:
1. I think we need [double back-ticks for code-style formatting](https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/restructuredtext/basics.html#inline-markup) in ReStructured Text.
2. It would be great to offer up an example of an `unchecked_` function for the reader of the guideline to read on for more. Seems the preferred way to do this is documented [here](https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/restructuredtext/basics.html#external-links).
```suggestion
   This guideline applies to any call to the integer type methods that begin with ``unchecked_``, such as ``core::primitive::u8::unchecked_add``_.
   
 .. _core::primitive::u8::unchecked_add: https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/primitive.u8.html#method.unchecked_add
```
(I didn't try to render the link above to `unchecked_add`, but reading the docs, this seems like it should work. Apologies if you have to fiddle a bit. 🙏 )

   .. rationale::
      :id: rat_7tF18FIwSYws
      :status: draft

>       The semantics for these expressions can result in panics, or silent wraparound upon overflow or division

Reviewer: nit

Suggest either "wrap-around" or "wrap around". Them concatenated together somehow looks a bit off to me 😅

Author: Agreed, resolved in 9dc042f

      configuration.

      .. code-block:: rust

         let x = 0;
         let x = 5 / x;
         let y = 135u8
         let y = 200u8 + y;

   .. compliant_example::
      :id: compl_ex_k1CD6xoZxhXb
      :status: draft

      The developer must explicitly indicate the intended behavior when a division by zero or arithmetic
      overflow occurs when using checked arithmetic methods.

      .. code-block:: rust

         let x = 0;
         let result = match 5u32.checked_div(x) {
            None => 0
            Some(r) => r
         }
         let y = 135u8
         let y = 200u8.wrapping_add(y);

.. guideline:: Do not use unchecked integer arithmetic methods
   :id: gui_mNEvznFjC3kG
   :category: advisory
   :status: draft
   :release: latest
   :fls: fls_Q9dhNiICGIfr
   :decidability: decidable
   :scope: module
   :tags: numerics

   This guideline applies to any call to the integer type methods that begin with ``unchecked_``, such as
   `core::primitive::u8::unchecked_add <https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/primitive.u8.html#method.unchecked_add>`_.

   .. rationale::
      :id: rat_7tF18FIwSYws
      :status: draft

>       The semantics for these expressions can result in panics, or silent wrap around upon overflow or division

Reviewer 2: This was probably just copied from above, but it is wrong. The unchecked functions lead to UB when overflow happens, so they are more dangerous than the regular arithmetic expressions.

Author: Thank you for pointing this out, resolved in 2fb316f

Reviewer 2: You forgot the next sentence. There it also says panic.

      checked operation would return ``None``. It is recommended to explicitly declare what should happen
      during these events with checked arithmetic functions.

      In a particularly performance sensitive critical section of the code it may be necessary to use the
      unchecked methods in tandem with assurances that the arguments will never meet the undefined behavior

>       conditions.

Reviewer 3: It seems to me that there is no need for this rule.  
To use unchecked arithmetic, you need an `unsafe` block, as with any function that can lead to undefined behavior.  
For `unsafe` blocks, we can make it mandatory to provide a justification (see the Clippy rule `undocumented_unsafe_blocks`).  
I expect that developers will not write `unsafe` code unless it is necessary.  
Therefore, this rule seems equivalent to _"don't write unsafe code"_.

Am I missing something?

Reviewer: Bump to surface for @vapdrs

Author: Apologies for the late response, just got back from vacation.

I agree with you on this matter. I had missed that these function were marked as `unsafe`, and I indeed think the advisory rule is unnecessary.

         }

         fn with_base(_: &Base) { ... }

.. guideline:: Do not use builtin arithmetic expressions
   :id: gui_7y0GAMmtMhch
   :category: required
   :status: draft
   :release: latest
   :fls: fls_Q9dhNiICGIfr
   :decidability: decidable
   :scope: module
   :tags: numerics

   This guideline applies when an ArithmeticExpression is used with operands whose types evaluates integer or

>    floating-point types.

Reviewer 4: You know, I'm not sure floating-point types fit here.

* One one hand, the `f32` and other such types are defined to be [compliant with a specific IEEE standard](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/primitive.f32.html).
* On the other hand, neither looking at that type's methods nor doing [a search for `checked_` methods in stdlib](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/index.html?search=checked) I've been able to find anything like the safe/checked operations we have for integer types. I suspect they do not exist for floats.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
   This guideline applies when an `ArithmeticExpression` is used with operands of integer or
   floating-point type.
```

Reviewer 5: I think I agree I would separate integer from floating point types.

Author: You are correct, the float point types don't fit here. Removed, and resolved formatting/grammar in 8d2392d4a942207d325a842863c6c8e4f9d5756f

   .. rationale::
      :id: rat_vLFlPWSCHRje
      :status: draft

      The built-in semantics for these expressions can result in panics, or silent wraparound when overflow,
      underflow, or division by zero occurs. It is better to explicitly declare what should happen during

>       these events with checked arithmetic functions.

Reviewer 4: This seems perfect to me :ok_hand:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
   .. rationale::
      :id: rat_vLFlPWSCHRje
      :status: draft

      The built-in semantics for these expressions can result in panics, or silent wraparound when overflow,
      underflow, or division by zero errors. 
      Explicitly declare what should happen during using checked arithmetic functions.
```

Reviewer 4: > Underflow is only a condition that occurs during floating point operations. Integers can only overflow. At least that's true in C.

I think that's true, but it's only true regarding the name – Underflow does occur in Rust, in the sense of attempting to go below the minimum value, but (I've just come to realize) [we call it Overflow](https://doc.rust-lang.org/stable/reference/expressions/operator-expr.html#overflow) just the same.

Reviewer 5: Underflow is typically a floating point property.  Floating point is really weird though because almost nothing is an error if you anticipate it.

Reviewer 4: > Floating point is really weird though because almost nothing is an error if you anticipate it.

I have so many questions. Though floating point handling and its semantics are outside the topic of this PR. I'd like to ask you about floats in the context of SC. Are you perchance in the `rust-lang` Zulip?

Author: Very interesting, you are right that Rust just calls all of it overflow for integers. Removed mentions of underflow in 8d2392d4a942207d325a842863c6c8e4f9d5756f

Reviewer: TIL, interesting!

Reviewer: Marking as resolved then!

   .. non_compliant_example::
      :id: non_compl_ex_0XeioBrgfh5z
      :status: draft

      When the division is performed, the right operand is evaluated to zero and the program panics.

      .. code-block:: rust

         let x = 0;
         let x = 5 / x;

   .. compliant_example::
      :id: compl_ex_k1CD6xoZxhXb
      :status: draft

      If an overflow occurs, it is explicit that the addition should wrap.

      .. code-block:: rust

         let y = 135u8
         let x = 200u8.wrapping_add(y);

> 

Reviewer: We are still at the point where these things can be discussed. If we'd like to have a number of compliant and non-compliant examples, this is possible likely in Sphinx Needs. Opened https://github.com/rustfoundation/safety-critical-rust-coding-guidelines/issues/141 to track.

> 

Reviewer 4: @PLeVasseur I would much prefer it if we had multiple examples, one for each specific case. Whenever I've read guidelines, having "atomic" (ie indivisible / minimal) examples has been essential for me to understand them quickly and without needing to ask for further help. I think we can benefit a lot if each example addresses a single concern.

So yeah, I think it's best if we block until we have this capability. Sorry, @vapdrs, it might be a pain to wait.

> 

Author: No worries here. I don't mind waiting.

   :fls: fls_Q9dhNiICGIfr
   :decidability: decidable
   :scope: module
   :tags: numerics

   This guideline applies to ArithmeticExpressions as well as any call to the integer or floating point type
   methods that begin with `unchecked_`.

   .. rationale::
      :id: rat_7tF18FIwSYws
      :status: draft

      The built-in semantics for these expressions can result in panics, or silent wraparound when overflow,
      underflow, or division by zero occurs. It is better to explicitly declare what should happen during
      these events with checked arithmetic functions.

   .. non_compliant_example::
      :id: non_compl_ex_JeRRIgVjq8IE
      :status: draft

      When the multiplication is performed, the evaluation could encounter wrapping or a panic that is not
      handled explicitly.

      .. code-block:: rust

         let x = 13u8.unchecked_mul(y);

   .. compliant_example::
      :id: compl_ex_HIBS9PeBa41c
      :status: draft

      When the addition is performed, the overflow will be detected and the author will need to explicitly
      deal with the Option value returned.

      .. code-block:: rust

         let y = 135u8
         let x = 200u8.checked_add(y);

> 

Reviewer 4: [There are many `unchecked` functions in `stdlib`](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/index.html?search=unchecked). I reckon we might want to add a rule against all of them? I'm not sure. Some of them might be reasonable for SC contexts.

Regardless: just like for the rule above, the `unchecked_` arithmetic functions mentioned here only exist for integer types. Floats do have a `to_int_unchecked` method, though.

Reviewer: @vapdrs or @felix91gr -- could you open a coding guideline issue to track this, if we think important but not addressing in this PR?

   .. rationale::
      :id: rat_vLFlPWSCHRje
      :status: draft

      The built-in semantics for these expressions can result in panics when division by zero occurs. It is
      recommended to either use checked arithmetic functions to explicitly specify the behavior in such
      situations or to use :std:`std::num::NonZero` as a divisor to avoid division by zero.

   .. non_compliant_example::
      :id: non_compl_ex_0XeioBrgfh5z
      :status: draft

      When the division is performed, the right operand is evaluated to zero and the program panics.

      .. code-block:: rust

         let x = 0;
         let x = 5 / x;

   .. compliant_example::
      :id: compl_ex_k1CD6xoZxhXb
      :status: draft

      The developer must explicitly indicate the intended behavior when a division by zero occurs, or use a
      type for which it is invalid to have a value of zero.

      .. code-block:: rust

         let x = 0;
         let result = match 5u32.checked_div(x) {
           None => 0
           Some(r) => r
         }
         if let Some(divisor) = match NonZero::<u32>::new(x) {
           let result = 5 / divisor;
         }

> 

Reviewer 4: @vapdrs Alex had a brilliant idea. Instead of making you wait for the multiple example functionality to be added to our pipeline, you could add all the non-compliant examples in one code block and all the compliant examples in another code block. Then whenever we are able to add multiple examples, they can be split into their separate blocks.

How does that sound? :)

         fn with_base(_: &Base) { ... }

.. guideline:: Do not use integer type as divisor
   :id: gui_7y0GAMmtMhch
   :category: advisory
   :status: draft
   :release: latest
   :fls: fls_Q9dhNiICGIfr
   :decidability: decidable
   :scope: module

>    :tags: numerics

Reviewer 4: I think we want to add here the tag `subset` and perhaps `reduce-human-error` as well

   <https://rust-lang.github.io/fls/expressions.html#syntax_divisionexpression>`_ or `RemainderExpression
   <https://rust-lang.github.io/fls/expressions.html#syntax_remainderexpression>`_ is used with a RightOperand of
   `integer type <https://rust-lang.github.io/fls/types-and-traits.html#integer-types>`_.

   .. rationale::
      :id: rat_vLFlPWSCHRje
      :status: draft

      The built-in semantics for these expressions can result in panics when division by zero occurs. It is
      recommended to either use checked arithmetic functions to explicitly specify the behavior in such
      situations or to use :std:`std::num::NonZero` as a divisor to avoid division by zero.

   .. non_compliant_example::
      :id: non_compl_ex_0XeioBrgfh5z
      :status: draft

      When the division is performed, the right operand is evaluated to zero and the program panics.

      .. code-block:: rust

         let x = 0;
         let y = 5 / x;
         let x = 5 % x;

   .. compliant_example::
      :id: compl_ex_k1CD6xoZxhXb
      :status: draft

      The developer must explicitly indicate the intended behavior when a division by zero occurs, or use a

>       type for which it is invalid to have a value of zero.

Reviewer 4: Like in my first comment, I don't think the description here of "explicitly indicate the intended behavior" makes sense now that the PR is focusing uniquely on the division-by-zero scenario.

I'd also change the second point, since it's not that a `NonZero<T>` with an inner value of zero is invalid.

It's more like it's impossible to have a `NonZero<T>` with an inner value of zero - unless the user constructs one using `unsafe` and uses the `unchecked_` constructor, which like everything regarding `unsafe`, probably merits its own entire guideline series. Though in that case, if the user _does_ construct a `NonZero<T>` using a `T` of value zero through the `unchecked_` method, that's Undefined Behavior.

Anyway. I'm thinking of something like this:

```
The developer must explicitly:

* Use checked division functions, which make sure a zero divisor is handled separately, or
* To first create divisors using :std:`std::num::NonZero`, which let the programmer prove the divisor is not zero. 
```

Author: I agree, I rephrased the suggestion though

         fn with_base(_: &Base) { ... }

.. guideline:: Do not use integer type as divisor
   :id: gui_7y0GAMmtMhch
   :category: advisory
   :status: draft
   :release: latest
   :fls: fls_Q9dhNiICGIfr
   :decidability: decidable
   :scope: module
   :tags: numerics, subset

   This guideline applies when a `DivisionExpression
   <https://rust-lang.github.io/fls/expressions.html#syntax_divisionexpression>`_ or `RemainderExpression
   <https://rust-lang.github.io/fls/expressions.html#syntax_remainderexpression>`_ is used with a RightOperand of
   `integer type <https://rust-lang.github.io/fls/types-and-traits.html#integer-types>`_.

   .. rationale::
      :id: rat_vLFlPWSCHRje
      :status: draft

      The built-in semantics for these expressions can result in panics when division by zero occurs. It is
      recommended to either:

      * Use checked division functions, which ensure the programmer handles the case when the divisor is zero, or
      * To create divisors using :std:`std::num::NonZero`, which then allows the programmer to perform those
        operations knowing that their divisor is not zero.

>       Since the compiler can assume the value of :std:`std::num::NonZero` is not zero, the check for zero
>       while dividing with standard integer types can be elided.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
      **Note:** since the compiler can assume the value of a :std:`std::num::NonZero`
      variable to not be zero, checks for zero when dividing by it can be elided in the
      final binary, increasing overall performance beyond what normal division can have.
```

   .. non_compliant_example::
      :id: non_compl_ex_0XeioBrgfh5z
      :status: draft

      When either the division or remainder are performed, the right operand is evaluated to zero and the
      program panics.

      .. code-block:: rust

         let x = 0;

>          let y = 5 / x;

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
         let y = 5 / x; // This line will panic.
```

I think this kind of comment always helps a little bit.

>          let x = 5 % x;

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
         let z = 5 % x; // This line would also panic.
```

Added the same kind of comment as above, plus changed the variable to `z` to keep things extra clear (by not using `x` anywhere but as a divisor)

   .. compliant_example::
      :id: compl_ex_k1CD6xoZxhXb
      :status: draft

>       There is no compliant way to divide with an integer type, however here the developer explicitly:

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
      There is no compliant way to divide with an integer type. Here, instead, the developer explicitly:
```

      * Uses a checked division function, which make sure a zero divisor is handled separately, and
      * Creates a divisor using :std:`std::num::NonZero`, which outsources the check for zero to the

>         construction of that struct.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
        construction of that struct. It's worth noting that such a divisor can be used multiple times after it's been created, whilst keeping the guarantee that such divisions will be safe.
```

I'd add this and extend the example to use the `divisor` more than once, to show the main difference in how the `checked_` APIs and the `NonZero<T>` types can be used.
